OBSDOCS-1646: Document enabling Full In-Cluster OpenTelemetry Support (#88721)
openshift/openshift-docs: observability/logging/logging-6.2/log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-6.2.adoc

> :_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY

Reviewer: I think that all of the headings in this Assembly need to be modularized into either CONCEPT or PROCEDURE. I'll comment these headings, but please reach out if you have questions. 

https://redhat-documentation.github.io/modular-docs/#assembly-definition

[id="log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-6-2"]
= OTLP data ingestion in Loki
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-6-2

toc::[]

Logging 6.2 enables an API endpoint using the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP). As OTLP is a standardized format not specifically designed for Loki, it requires additional configuration on Loki's side to map OpenTelemetry's data format to Loki's data model. OTLP lacks concepts such as _stream labels_ or _structured metadata_. Instead, OTLP provides metadata about log entries as *attributes*, grouped into three categories:

* Resource
* Scope
* Log

This allows metadata to be set for multiple entries simultaneously or individually as needed.

> include::modules/log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-data-ingestion.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for a follow up. In this document I believe that we can move the text in the `Prerequisites` to the paragraph right above and drop the `Prerequisites` as they do not add much value

Author: Added this in the Jira as a comment: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OBSDOCS-1681?focusedId=26658126&page=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.issuetabpanels%3Acomment-tabpanel#comment-26658126

[id="attribute-mapping_{context}"]

> == Attribute mapping

Reviewer: Can this be a CONCEPT module?

When the {loki-op} is set to `openshift-logging` mode, it automatically applies a default set of attribute mappings. These mappings align specific OTLP attributes with Loki's stream labels and structured metadata.

For typical setups, these default mappings should be sufficient. However, you might need to customize attribute mapping in the following cases:

> * Using a custom Collector: If your setup includes a custom collector that generates additional attributes, consider customizing the mapping to ensure these attributes are retained in Loki.

Author: done

> * Using a custom Collector: If your setup includes a custom collector that generates additional attributes, consider customizing the mapping to ensure these attributes are retained in Loki.

Reviewer 3: I think we can just turn the existing sentence around:

```suggestion
* Using a custom Collector: If your setup includes a custom collector that generates additional attributes that you do not want to store, consider customizing the mapping to ensure these attributes are dropped by Loki.
```

* Adjusting attribute detail levels: If the default attribute set is more detailed than necessary, you can reduce it to essential attributes only. This can avoid excessive data storage and streamline the {logging} process.

> [id="custom-attribute-mapping-for-openshift_{context}"]

Reviewer: Can this be a CONCEPT module?

=== Custom attribute mapping for OpenShift

When using the {loki-op} in `openshift-logging` mode, attribute mapping follow OpenShift default values, but you can configure custom mappings to adjust default values. 
In the `openshift-logging` mode, you can configure custom attribute mappings globally for all tenants or for individual tenants as needed. When you define custom mappings, they are appended to the OpenShift default values. If you do not need default labels, you can disable them in the tenant configuration.

[NOTE]
====
A major difference between the {loki-op} and Loki lies in inheritance handling. Loki copies only `default_resource_attributes_as_index_labels` to tenants by default, while the {loki-op} applies the entire global configuration to each tenant in the `openshift-logging` mode.
====

Within `LokiStack`, attribute mapping configuration is managed through the `limits` setting. See the following example `LokiStack` configuration:

[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  limits:
    global:
      otlp: {} # <1>
    tenants:
      application: <2>

>         otlp: {} # 

Author: right, good catch! fixed

        otlp: {} # <2>
----
<1> Global OTLP attribute configuration.

> <2> OTLP attribute configuration for the `application` tenant within `openshift-logging` mode.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if it's relevant to say this
```suggestion
<2> OTLP attribute configuration for the `application` tenant within `openshift-logging` mode. `infrastructure` and `audit` are also supported
```

Author: @JoaoBraveCoding, how about:

2> OTLP attribute configuration for the `application`, `infrastructure`, or `audit` tenant within `openshift-logging` mode.

[NOTE]
====

> Both global and per-tenant OTLP configurations can map attributes to stream labels. At least one stream label is required to save a log entry to Loki storage, so ensure this configuration meets that requirement.

Reviewer 2: Users are not required to always provide a stream label
```suggestion
Both global and per-tenant OTLP configurations can map attributes to stream labels.
```

Stream labels derive only from resource-level attributes, which the `LokiStack` resource structure reflects. See the following `LokiStack` example configuration:

[source,yaml]
----
spec:
  limits:
    global:
      otlp:
        streamLabels:
          resourceAttributes:
          - name: "k8s.namespace.name"
          - name: "k8s.pod.name"
          - name: "k8s.container.name"
----

You can drop attributes of type resource, scope, or log from the log entry.

[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  limits:
    global:
      otlp:
        streamLabels:

>           # ...

Reviewer: You can bring the spacing back for this ellipses so its clearer that there's a break when you're scanning.

>           # ...

Author: fixed

        drop:
          resourceAttributes:
          - name: "process.command_line"
          - name: "k8s\\.pod\\.labels\\..+"
            regex: true
          scopeAttributes:
          - name: "service.name"
          logAttributes:
          - name: "http.route"
----

[TIP]
====
Use regular expressions by setting `regex: true` to apply a configuration for attributes with similar names.
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
Avoid using regular expressions for stream labels, as this can increase data volume.

> ====

Author: since the one above was a tip, i just removed the admonition and added the text to the running text. WDYT?

Attributes that are not explicitly set as stream labels or dropped from the entry are saved as structured metadata by default.

> [id="customizing-openshift-defaults_{context}"]

Reviewer: Can this be a CONCEPT module? Maybe with the title OpenShift defaults customization? Since it isn't a procedure, it doesn't really need to be a gerund form title.

[id="customizing-openshift-defaults_{context}"]
=== Customizing OpenShift defaults

> In `openshift-logging` mode, certain attributes are required and cannot be removed from the configuration due to their role in OpenShift functions. Other attributes, labeled *recommended*, might be disabled if performance is impacted. 

Reviewer 2: Also a link to the data OTEL data model might be necessary here otherwise users will not get the "recommended" reference
```suggestion
In `openshift-logging` mode, certain attributes are required and cannot be removed from the configuration due to their role in OpenShift functions. Other attributes, labeled *recommended*, might be dropped if performance is impacted. 
```

Author: updated. And link to this? https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/logging/logging-6.1/log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6.1.html#attributes_log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6-1

Reviewer 2: Yup that's it sorry if it wasn't clear

Author: thaks, done

> In `openshift-logging` mode, certain attributes are required and cannot be removed from the configuration due to their role in OpenShift functions. Other attributes, labeled *recommended*, might be dropped if performance is impacted. For information about the attributes, see link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/logging/logging-6.1/log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6.1.html#attributes_log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6-1[Attributes].

Author: nice suggestion, i should have thought of it honestly!

> When using the `openshift-logging` mode without custom attributes, you can achieve immediate compatibility with OpenShift tools. If additional attributes are needed as stream labels or structured metadata, use custom configuration. Custom configurations can merge with default configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the `openshift-logging` mode without custom attributes, you can achieve immediate compatibility with OpenShift tools. If additional attributes are needed as stream labels or some attributes need to be droped, use custom configuration. Custom configurations can merge with default configurations.
```

Author: done

> In the `openshift-logging` mode, certain attributes are required and cannot be removed from the configuration due to their role in OpenShift functions. Other attributes, labeled *recommended*, might be dropped if performance is impacted. For information about the attributes, see link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/logging/logging-6.1/log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6.1.html#attributes_log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6-1[OpenTelemetry data model attributes].

Reviewer: Just wanted to check, is there a reason why this link is not an xref?

Author: We don't have this assembly in this release branch yet, i'll update this to xref once the assembly is merged in this release branch as part of https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OBSDOCS-1747

> [id="removing-recommended-attributes_{context}"]

Reviewer: Can this be a PROCEDURE module?

[id="removing-recommended-attributes_{context}"]
=== Removing recommended attributes

To reduce default attributes in `openshift-logging` mode, disable recommended attributes:

[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  tenants:
    mode: openshift-logging
    openshift:
      otlp:
        disableRecommendedAttributes: true # <1>
----
<1> Set `disableRecommendedAttributes: true` to remove recommended attributes, which limits default attributes to the *required attributes*.

[NOTE]
====
This setting might negatively impact query performance, as it removes default stream labels. You should pair this option with a custom attribute configuration to retain attributes essential for queries.
====

[role="_additional-resources"]
[id="additional-resources_{context}"]
== Additional resources
* link:https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/labels/[Loki labels]
* link:https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/labels/structured-metadata/[Structured metadata]

> * link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/#attribute[OpenTelemetry attribute]

Author: agreed, added.

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-6-2"]

> = OTLP data ingestion in Loki

Author: I'm no sure why this was done in 6.1. I just followed the same in 6.2. I'm hesitant to change it as part of this PR before investigating why this was done in 6.1, perhaps there was some reason. How about we let this be for now?

> = OTLP data ingestion in Loki

Reviewer 4: Sure. np

include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-6-2

toc::[]

> Logging 6.2 enables an API endpoint using the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP). As OTLP is a standardized format not specifically designed for Loki, it requires additional configuration on Loki's side to map OpenTelemetry's data format to Loki's data model. OTLP lacks concepts such as _stream labels_ or _structured metadata_. Instead, OTLP provides metadata about log entries as *attributes*, grouped into three categories:

Author: changed to "You can use an API endpoint using the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) with Logging"

* Resource
* Scope
* Log

> This allows metadata to be set for multiple entries simultaneously or individually as needed.

Author: done and backported

include::modules/log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-data-ingestion.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[id="attribute-mapping_{context}"]
== Attribute mapping

When the {loki-op} is set to `openshift-logging` mode, it automatically applies a default set of attribute mappings. These mappings align specific OTLP attributes with Loki's stream labels and structured metadata.

> For typical setups, these default mappings should be sufficient. However, you might need to customize attribute mapping in the following cases:

Author: done

> * Using a custom Collector: If your setup includes a custom collector that generates additional attributes that you do not want to store, consider customizing the mapping to ensure these attributes are dropped by Loki.

Author: done

* Adjusting attribute detail levels: If the default attribute set is more detailed than necessary, you can reduce it to essential attributes only. This can avoid excessive data storage and streamline the {logging} process.

[id="custom-attribute-mapping-for-openshift_{context}"]
=== Custom attribute mapping for OpenShift

When using the {loki-op} in `openshift-logging` mode, attribute mapping follow OpenShift defaults, but custom mappings can be configured to adjust these. Custom mappings allow further configurations to meet specific needs.

> In `openshift-logging` mode, custom attribute mappings can be configured globally for all tenants or for individual tenants as needed. When custom mappings are defined, they are appended to the OpenShift defaults. If default recommended labels are not required, they can be disabled in the tenant configuration.

Author: I think let's keep it this way for now, as this is something that is already published this way in the previous release: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/logging/logging-6.1/log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-6.1.html#custom-attribute-mapping-for-openshift_log6x-configuring-lokistack-otlp-6-1

[NOTE]
====

> A major difference between the {loki-op} and Loki itself lies in inheritance handling. Loki only copies `default_resource_attributes_as_index_labels` to tenants by default, while the {loki-op} applies the entire global configuration to each tenant in `openshift-logging` mode.

Author: done

====

> Within `LokiStack`, attribute mapping configuration is managed through the `limits` setting:

Author: done

[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  limits:
    global:
      otlp: {} # <1>
    tenants:
      application: <2>
        otlp: {} # 
----

> <1> Global OTLP attribute configuration.

Author: done

> <2> OTLP attribute configuration for the `application` tenant within `openshift-logging` mode. You can also configure `infrastructure`, and `audit` tenants in addition to `application` tenants.

Author: done

[NOTE]
====

> Both global and per-tenant OTLP configurations can map attributes to stream labels.

Author: done

====

> Stream labels derive only from resource-level attributes, which the `LokiStack` resource structure reflects:

Author: done

[source,yaml]
----
spec:
  limits:
    global:
      otlp:
        streamLabels:
          resourceAttributes:
          - name: "k8s.namespace.name"
          - name: "k8s.pod.name"
          - name: "k8s.container.name"
----

You can drop attributes of type resource, scope or log from the log entry.

[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  limits:
    global:
      otlp:
        streamLabels:
          # ...
        drop:
          resourceAttributes:
          - name: "process.command_line"
          - name: "k8s\\.pod\\.labels\\..+"
            regex: true
          scopeAttributes:
          - name: "service.name"
          logAttributes:
          - name: "http.route"
----

[TIP]
====
Use regular expressions by setting `regex: true` to apply a configuration for attributes with similar names.
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
Avoid using regular expressions for stream labels, as this can increase data volume.
====

Attributes that are not explicitly set as stream labels or dropped from the entry are saved as structured metadata by default.

[id="customizing-openshift-defaults_{context}"]
=== Customizing OpenShift defaults

> In `openshift-logging` mode, certain attributes are required and cannot be removed from the configuration due to their role in OpenShift functions. Other attributes, labeled *recommended*, might be dropped if performance is impacted. For information about the attributes, see link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/logging/logging-6.1/log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6.1.html#attributes_log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6-1[OpenTelemetry data model attributes].

Author: done

When using the `openshift-logging` mode without custom attributes, you can achieve immediate compatibility with OpenShift tools. If additional attributes are needed as stream labels or some attributes need to be droped, use custom configuration. Custom configurations can merge with default configurations.

[id="removing-recommended-attributes_{context}"]
=== Removing recommended attributes

> To reduce default attributes in `openshift-logging` mode, disable recommended attributes:

Author: done

[source,yaml]
----
# ...
spec:
  tenants:
    mode: openshift-logging
    openshift:
      otlp:
        disableRecommendedAttributes: true # <1>
----

> <1> Set `disableRecommendedAttributes: true` to remove recommended attributes, which limits default attributes to the *required attributes*.

Reviewer 5: Slight modification:
Set `disableRecommendedAttributes: true` to remove recommended attributes, which limits default attributes to the *required attributes/**stream labels***.

Author: updated with a small change

> <1> Set `disableRecommendedAttributes: true` to remove recommended attributes, which limits default attributes to the required attributes or stream labels.
> 
> [NOTE]
> ====
> This setting might negatively impact query performance, as it removes default stream labels. You should pair this option with a custom attribute configuration to retain attributes essential for queries.
> ====

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<1> Set `disableRecommendedAttributes: true` to remove recommended attributes, which limits default attributes to the required attributes or stream labels.
+
[NOTE]
====
This setting might negatively impact query performance, as it removes default stream labels. You must pair this option with a custom attribute configuration to retain attributes essential for queries.
====
```

- Try adding `+` so that this note is explicitly a part of <1> because it's related to the `...:true` setting.
- Avoid using should: [guideline](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#s)

Author: done

[role="_additional-resources"]
[id="additional-resources_{context}"]
== Additional resources
* link:https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/labels/[Loki labels]

> * link:https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/get-started/labels/structured-metadata/[Structured metadata]

Author: done

* link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/logging/logging-6.1/log6x-opentelemetry-data-model-6.1.html[OpenTelemetry data model]

> * link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/#attribute[OpenTelemetry attribute]

Author: done
